---
title: "Metacognition and critical thinking. Instance-level demand scales and annotation by LLMs" 
date: 2024-07-01
tags: ["metacognition","critical thinking"]
author: ["Kexin Jiang-Chen", "José Hernández-Orallo", "Fernando Martínez-Plumed"]

---

---

#### Description

The rapidly growing field of artificial intelligence has led to the development of advanced Large
Language Models (LLMs) with impressive language skills. However, it is still unclear the extent
to which these models possess metacognitive abilities, which are critical for advanced
reasoning and learning. This study aims to evaluate metacognition and critical thinking abilities
in LLMs, with a focus on identifying the most effective scales and dimensions for assessment.
We propose a comprehensive framework, encompassing three key dimensions: the need for
critical thinking processes, the difficulty of calibrating knowns and unknowns, and the difficulty in
identifying relevant information. This framework is used to annotate question instances across
several benchmarks from BIG-Bench and HELM, aimed at measuring advanced cognitive skills
in LLMs. The annotations are generated by the state-of-the-art LLM, GPT-4. These annotations
are then used as predictors to build performance models for various LLMs on these
benchmarks, with the ultimate goal of determining the extent to which the benchmarks truly
measure metacognitive capabilities. Our findings reveal that while many models lack
metacognitive capabilities, larger models exhibit some indications of such abilities. Furthermore,
the use of a multi-dimensional scale for metacognitive demands improves the predictability
compared to a single integrated scale. By providing an evaluation tool for metacognition in
LLMs, this study provides insights into the effectiveness of benchmarks in assessing
metacognitive abilities. The finding highlights the importance of careful benchmark design and
the potential of multi-dimensional scales in capturing the complex nature of metacognition.

---

#### Link to Materials

+ [Final Degree Thesis](final_degree_thesis.pdf)
+ [Labelling with Anchors](labelling_with_anchors.pdf)